DOMAIN: infrastructure-as-code
DOCS WITH TEXT: 26

=== SOURCE: "Terraform Interview Guide for DevOps & Solutions Architects role Top Terraform ===
🎯 "Terraform Interview Guide for DevOps & Solutions Architects role 
Top Terraform Interview Questions with real-world project experience!

Whether you're preparing for DevOps roles, platform engineering, or cloud infra interviews 
— this guide dives into what really matters in production.

1. Q: How do you manage infrastructure across multiple environments using Terraform? 
A: 
• Use workspaces (terraform workspace) to manage environment isolation (dev, stage, 
prod). 
• Separate state files per environment. 
• Use environment-specific variables or .tfvars files. 
• Organize code into modules reused across environments. 
Scenario: We managed dev, stage, and prod using workspaces. Modules were reused with 
environment-specific variables. The terraform workspace command ensured the correct 
backend and state were used per environment, avoiding resource conflicts.

2. Q: How do you structure a Terraform project for large-scale infrastructure? 
A: 
• Use a modular architecture: separate modules for VPC, compute, RDS, etc. 
• Keep reusable logic in modules/ and environment-specific code in envs/. 
• Leverage remote state with backends like S3 + DynamoDB for locking. 
• Follow naming conventions and directory standards. 
Scenario: For a large-scale migration, we used a mono-repo with shared modules. Teams 
deployed via terraform apply using S3 backend and DynamoDB for state locking.

3. Q: How do you manage Terraform state securely and reliably? 
A: 
• Store state remotely using a backend (e.g., S3, Azure Blob). 
• Enable state locking with DynamoDB. 
• Encrypt state at rest using KMS. 
• Restrict access via IAM; avoid committing state to Git.

Scenario: State stored in S3, encrypted with KMS, locked using DynamoDB. Access 
controlled via IAM policies to prevent concurrent runs.

4. Q: What is Terraform’s depends_on and when would you use it? 
A: 
• Forces an explicit dependency between resources. 
• Use when implicit dependencies are not detected (e.g., null_resource, provisioners). 
• Prevents race conditions during terraform apply. 
Scenario: aws_instance depended on a null_resource for setup script. We used depends_on = 
[null_resource.setup] to control execution order.

5. Q: How do you implement Blue/Green deployments with Terraform? 
A: 
• Use separate modules or configs for blue and green stacks. 
• Switch traffic via ALB Target Group or Route 53. 
• Use terraform workspace or parallel stacks for management. 
• Decommission old stack after validation. 
Scenario: Deployed v1 and v2 ECS using separate modules. Route 53 updated to green, and 
terraform destroyed old version post validation.

6. Q: How do you manage secrets in Terraform without exposing them in code? 
A: 
• Avoid hardcoding secrets in .tf or .tfvars. 
• Use environment variables (TF_VAR_secret_name). 
• Use SOPS, Vault, or AWS SSM with data sources. 
• Inject via CI/CD secrets management during runtime. 
Scenario: 
Used AWS Secrets Manager + data "aws_secretsmanager_secret_version

=== SOURCE: ANSIBLE Ansible is an open source software that automates software… ===
ANSIBLE

Ansible is an open source software that automates software provisioning, configuration 
management, and application deployment.

Ansible is commonly used for tasks like software installation, configuration, and system 
updates across multiple servers or devices in a network.

Orchestration, Security and compliance.

Uses YAML Scripting language which works on KEY-VALUE PAIR

Ansible GUI is called as Ansible Tower. It was just Drag and Drop.

It helps reduce manual work, improve consistency, and save time in managing complex 
environments.

The Keys Features of Ansible: 
Agentless :There is no software or agent to be installed on the client that communicates back 
to the server.

Simple and extensible: Ansible is written in Python and uses YAML for playbook language, 
both of which are considered relatively easy to learn.

PLAYBOOK: 
Ansible playbooks are a way to send commands to remote computers in a scripted way. 
Instead of using Ansible commands individually to remotely configure computers from the 
command line, you can configure entire complex environments by passing a script to one or 
more systems.

WHY ANSIBLE: 
While managing the multiple servers its hard to keep their configuration identical. If you have 
multiple servers which needs to configure the same setup in all. while doing the one to one 
server their might be a chances to miss some configuration steps in some servers. Thats why 
automation tools come into play! The automation tools like Ansible, Chef, Puppet and 
SaltStack all are based on a same principle.

DESCRIBE THE DESIRED STATE OF THE SYSTEM 
MASTER-SLAVE CONCEPT :

STEP-1: LAUNCH 5 INSTANCE (1-MASTER, 4-SLAVE)

STEP-2: INSTALL ANSIBLE, PYTHON AND PIP ON MASTER SERVER

amazon-linux-extras install ansible2 -y 
yum install python-pip -y 
STEP-3: ADD ANSIBLE USER IN ANSIBLE SERVER (useradd ansible) 
STEP-4: SET A PASSWORD TO USER IN ANSIBLE SERVER (passwd ansible)

STEP-5: GIVE ROOT PERMISSIONS TO ANSIBLE USER

visudo ---> 100 line (100gg)

add these second line (ansible ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: ALL) 
now save & quit from the flle 
STEP-6: NOW WE HAVE TO SAY YES TO PASSWORD AUTHNETICATION

vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config---- > 63 line (63gg)

change the password authentication from no to yes 
STEP-7: RESTART SSHD (systemctl restart sshd)

NOTE: REPETE ALL THESE STEPS ON ALL SLAVE SERVERS FROM STEP -3 
TO STEP-7 
STEP-8: LOGIN AS ANSIBLE USER (su - ansible) 
STEP-9: GENERATE A KEY IN ANSIBLE USER ON MASTER SERVER (ssh-keygen)

It will generate 2 keys (public & private)

STEP-10: COPY THE PUBLIC KEY TO ALL SLAVE SERVERS (ssh-copy-id ansible@slave_ip) 
STEP-11: LOGIN TO THE SLAVE (ssh ansible@slave_ip)

NOW ITS TIME TO CHANGE ANSIBLE CONFIGURATIONS: 
STEP-12: EXIT FROM ANSIBLE USER ON MASTER SERVER (exit), so we will be in root user 
STEP-13 : ENBALE ANSIBLE INVENTORY AND SUDO USER (vi /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg)

save & quit from the file

STEP-14: ADD INVENTORIES (vi /etc/ansible/hosts)

HERE dev & test is the group names 
save &

=== SOURCE: An Ansible playbook is a YAML script used to automate system configurations,… ===
An Ansible playbook is a YAML script used to automate
system configurations, deployments, and management
tasks.
it is also used to execute multiple tasks.
Ansible playbook
p la yb o o k:

Verify and correct the syntax of the Ansible playbook
ansible-playbook --syntax-check app.yml- The ansible-playbook --syntax-
check app.yml command validates YAML syntax without executing the
playbook.
output:
To execute the Ansible playbook: 
ansible-playbook -i host app.yml- The command runs the app.yml
playbook using the specified host inventory for target machines.
output:

To uninstall software using an Ansible playbook:
ansible all -i host -m yum -a “name=httpd state=absent
autoremove=true” -b - It removes httpd package from all
hosts using yum with autoremove, running with become
privileges.
output:

steps:
To install git software in playbook:
1.Create an Ansible playbook named hello.yml
2.To check the syntax of ansible playbook
output:
p r o je c t 1

3.To execute the playbook:
output:

How to install ansible without pip:
1.sudo amazon-linux-extras install ansible2 - This command
installs Ansible 2 on Amazon Linux using the amazon-linux-
extras repository with sudo.
output:

2.ansible --version - We can check the Ansible version and
the file that already contains the configuration.
configuration file:
3.sudo nano /etc/ansible/ansible.cfg - This command opens
Ansible's configuration file in the Nano editor with superuser
privileges for editing.
"Change the setting in the configuration file to host_key_checking = False so
that we don’t have to specify the inventory file each time."

4.sudo nano /etc/ansible/hosts - This command opens the
Ansible inventory file (/etc/ansible/hosts) in the Nano editor with
superuser privileges, 
5.ansible all -i host -m ping - used to check connectivity to all hosts listed
in the inventory file.
output:

6.ansible all -i host -m shell -a “mkdir sample” - This Ansible
command runs the mkdir sample shell command on all hosts in the
host inventory, creating a directory named "sample".
output:
7.ansible all -m package -a name=httpd state=installed “-b -install
software in slave machine using package module
output:

=== SOURCE: Ansible Introduction to Ansible Ansible is an open-source IT automation tool… ===
Ansible

Introduction to Ansible

Ansible is an open-source IT automation tool used to automate software provisioning, configuration

management,

application

deployment,

and

task

automation.

It

simplifies

tasks

like

provisioning

servers,

configuring

systems,

and

managing

configurations

across

infrastructure.

History of Ansible

Ansible was created by Michael DeHaan in 2012. It was developed as a simple, agentless

configuration

management

tool

with

an

emphasis

on

simplicity

and

ease

of

use.

Ansible

was

later

acquired

by

Red

Hat

in

2015.

Since

then,

it

has

gained

significant

popularity

in

DevOps

environments.

Advantages of Configuration Management Tools

Configuration Management (CM) tools like Ansible provide the following advantages:

● Consistency : Ensure configurations are the same across environments. ● Automation : Automates repetitive tasks like software installation, updates, and system

configurations.
 ● Scalability : CM tools scale across hundreds or thousands of machines with minimal human

intervention.
 ● Auditing : CM tools can track changes, making auditing easier. ● Error reduction : Minimize manual errors in system configurations and application setups.

Why Ansible?

● Agentless : Ansible does not require agents to be installed on target machines. It uses SSH or

WinRM

for

communication.
 ● Declarative Syntax : Users declare what they want to happen, not how it should happen. ● Simple and Easy : Ansible uses YAML, a human-readable language, making it simple for users

to

write

automation

scripts.
 ● Idempotence is a technical term that means a function or operation can be repeated without

changing

the

result
.
 ● Idempotency : Ansible ensures that tasks are executed only when necessary, avoiding

redundant

operations.
 ● Extensible : Ansible provides an easy mechanism for integrating with other tools and creating

custom

modules.

Ansible Advantages

● Ease of Use : Simple, clear syntax in YAML. ● No Need for Agents : Direct communication via SSH. ● Cross-platform : Works on Linux, Windows, and macOS.

● Extensible : Ansible can be extended with custom modules. ● Declarative : You define the desired state, not the steps to reach that state. ● Powerful Features : Support for roles, playbooks, and dynamic inventories.

Install & Configure Ansible

1. Install Ansible : ○ On Linux: sudo apt-get install ansible (Ubuntu/Debian) ○ On RedHat/CentOS: sudo yum install ansible ○ On macOS: brew install ansible 2. Configure Ansible : ○ Edit the ansible.cfg file to configure settings like default inventory file, SSH

settings,

etc.

Use Cases of Ansible

● Infrastructure Provisioning : Automate server provisioning across cloud and on-premise

environments.
 ● Configuration Management : Ensure consistent configuration across machines. ● Application Deployment : Automate the deployment of software applications across many

servers.
 ● Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/

=== SOURCE: Ansible Playbook An Ansible Playbook is a file written in YAML format that… ===
Ansible Playbook

An Ansible Playbook is a file written in YAML format that contains instructions for automating 
tasks on remote servers. Think of it as a set of "recipes" that tell Ansible what to do, step by step. 
These instructions can include installing software, configuring files, managing users, restarting 
services, and more. 
Key Points in Simple Words: 
1. YAML File: It's written in a human-readable format, easy to write and understand. 
2. Tasks: A playbook has tasks, which are specific actions like "install Apache" or "copy a file." 
3. Plays: Each play in the playbook targets a group of servers and specifies what tasks to perform 
on them. 
4. Modules: Tasks use Ansible modules (like tools) to perform specific operations, e.g., yum for 
installing packages or copy for copying files. 
Example: 
Here’s a simple playbook to install Apache on a web server:

How It Works: 
• hosts: Defines the group of servers (e.g., webservers) where the tasks will run. 
• become: true: Allows running tasks as a superuser. 
• Tasks: Each task does one thing, like installing Apache or starting its service. 
In summary, an Ansible Playbook is a simple, organized way to automate IT tasks and make your 
work easier and faster.

Here’s a line-by-line explanation of the playbook snippet: 
Play Definition

- name: The name of the play, which describes what this play does. In this case, it installs Apache 
on a web server. It's for readability and helps you understand the purpose of the play at a glance.

hosts: Specifies the group of servers (defined in the Ansible inventory file) where this play will 
run. Here, webservers is the target group.

become: Indicates that the tasks in this play should be executed with elevated privileges (e.g., as 
the root user). This is essential for tasks like installing software or managing services. 
Tasks Section

tasks: Defines a list of actions to perform on the specified hosts. Each task has a name and 
specific instructions. 
Task 1: Install Apache

- name: A descriptive label for the task. This one is labeled "Install Apache" to indicate its 
purpose.

• yum: Refers to the Ansible module used to manage packages on Red Hat-based systems (like 
CentOS or RHEL). 
• name: httpd: Specifies the package to install (httpd, which is Apache for Red Hat-based

Task 2: Start Apache Service

- name: A descriptive label for the task. This one is labeled "Start Apache service" to explain that it 
starts the Apache service.

• service: Refers to the Ansible module for managing services on a system. 
• name: httpd: Specifies the service name (Apache is called httpd on Red Hat-based systems). 
• state: started: Ensures the service is running. If it’s not running, Ansible will start it. If it’s 
already running, no action will be taken. 
Summary of the Playbook: 
1. Targets the webservers group. 
2. Uses root privileges (become: true). 
3. Task 1: Installs Apache (httpd package) if not already present. 
4. Task 2: Ensures the Apache servi

=== SOURCE: Ansible and Ansible Architecture The Ansible orchestration engine interacts… ===
Ansible and Ansible Architecture 
The Ansible orchestration engine interacts with a user who is writing the Ansible 
playbook to execute the Ansible orchestration and interact along with the services of 
private or public cloud and configuration management database. The below diagram 
explains it. .

Ansible Architecture 
Playbooks here actually define your workflow because whatever tasks that you write 
in a playbook, it gets executed in the same order that you have written them. They are 
written in YAML format, which describes the tasks and executes through the Ansible. 
Also, you can launch the tasks synchronously and asynchronously with playbooks. 
The above architecture has a bunch of Host machines to which ansible server 
connects and pushes the playbooks through SSH. It is not always needed to use an 
SSH for connecting with your host machines; you can also use a connection plug-in. 
For example, Ansible provides you with a docker container connection plugin and 
using that connection plug-in, you can easily connect to all your Docker containers 
and start configuring right away.

It has an Ansible automation engine using which users can directly run 
a playbook that gets deployed on the hosts. There are multiple components in the 
Ansible automation engine. The first is a host inventory. It’s a list of all the IP 
addresses of all the hosts. Let’s go one by one, in the Ansible automation engine. 
Ansible works against multiple systems in your infrastructure at the same time. It 
does this by selecting portions of systems listed in Ansible’s inventory file, which 
defaults to being saved in the location /etc/ansible/hosts. You can specify a different 
inventory file using the -i <path> option on the command line. 
• Playbooks and Inventory

As a best practice, you don’t want your Ansible architecture that consists of playbooks and Inventory 
to be too specific. But on the other hand, you need to have a certain level of abstraction and keep out 
precise information. Therefore, to develop flexible code, you must separate site-specific information 
from the code, done with variables in Ansible.

Remember that when you develop dynamic code along with your static information, you can use this 
on any site with minor modifications to the variables themselves. However, you can have variables in 
different places, and where you place variables, such as a play header or Inventory, will take different 
precedence. So, to provide site-specific code, variables can be used in your Ansible deployment 
architecture.

Before you proceed, you may find the following posts helpful for pre-information: 
1. Network Configuration Automation 
2. Ansible Variables 
3. Network Traffic Engineering

• A key point: Video on Ansible automation and Ansible architecture. 
In this video, we will discuss Ansible automation and Ansible architecture. In particular, Ansible 
Engine is run from the CLI. This is compared to a different Ansible deployment architecture with 
An

=== SOURCE: Ansible for DevOps Engineers Zero to Advanced with Real-World Examples Author : ===
Ansible for DevOps Engineers Zero to

Advanced

with

Real-World

Examples

Author : Umar Shahzad

Introduction to Ansible

Ansible is an open-source automation tool used for configuration management, application

deployment,

and

task

automation.

It

is

agentless,

meaning

it

does

not

require

software

to

be

installed

on

remote

systems.

Ansible

operates

using

SSH

for

Linux

systems

and

WinRM

for

Windows

systems.

Why Use Ansible?

● Agentless Architecture : No need to install agents on target machines. ● Idempotency : Ensures that running the same playbook multiple times does not cause

unintended

changes.
 ● Declarative Language : Uses YAML for configuration, making it easy to read and write. ● Scalability : Manages thousands of nodes efficiently.

Setting Up Ansible

Installation (Linux) sudo apt update && sudo apt install ansible -y

OR (For RHEL-based systems)

sudo yum install ansible -y

Installation (MacOS) brew install ansible

Verifying Installation ansible --version

Configuring Ansible

Edit the inventory file (default location: /etc/ansible/hosts):

[webservers] 192.168.1.10 192.168.1.11

[dbservers] 192.168.1.20

Writing Your First Playbook

A playbook is a YAML file containing automation instructions.

Example: Installing Apache - name: Install Apache Web Server

hosts: webservers

become: yes

tasks:

- name: Install Apache

apt:

name: apache2

state: present

- name: Start and Enable Apache

service:

name: apache2

state: started

enabled: yes

Run the playbook using:

ansible-playbook apache.yml

Advanced Ansible Features

Ansible Roles

Roles help structure playbooks by separating tasks, variables, and handlers.

ansible-galaxy init my_role

Directory structure:

my_role/ ├── tasks/main.yml ├── handlers/main.yml ├── templates/ ├── files/ ├── vars/main.yml ├── defaults/main.yml └── meta/main.yml

Ansible Vault (Encrypting Sensitive Data) ansible-vault encrypt secrets.yml ansible-vault decrypt secrets.yml

Ansible Loops (Running Tasks Multiple Times) - name: Install multiple packages

hosts: all

tasks:

- name: Install required packages

apt:

name: "{{ item }}"

state: present

loop:

- vim

- curl

- git

Ansible Conditionals - name: Install software based on OS

hosts: all

tasks:

- name: Install Apache on Debian-based systems

apt:

name: apache2

state: present

when: ansible_os_family == "Debian"

Best Practices

1. Use Roles for Scalability : Keep your playbooks modular. 2. Avoid Hardcoding Values : Use variables and templates. 3. Secure Sensitive Data : Always use Ansible Vault. 4. Use Dynamic Inventory : Fetch inventory dynamically for cloud environments. 5. Test in Staging Before Production : Always validate changes in a non-production

environment.
 6. Use Handlers for Efficient State Management : Restart services only when required. 7. Enable Logging for Troubleshooting : Configure logs in ansible.cfg.

Use Cases

● Cloud Automation : Automate AWS, Azure, or GCP configurations. ● CI/CD Pi

=== SOURCE: Ansible forTeenagers SUITABLE FOR ADULTS A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t… ===
Ansible forTeenagers
SUITABLE FOR ADULTS
A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t
Ansible is an open-source automation tool for configuration and
management of IT infrastructures. It allows for the easy
management of numerous servers using YAML language to describe
automated tasks. Ansible operates agentlessly, meaning there is no
need to install additional software on the nodes it manages.
Ansible is popular for several reasons:
Simplicity and ease of use: The playbooks (configuration files) are
written in YAML, a simple and human-readable language.
Powerful and flexible: Ansible can handle complex tasks and
adapt to various environments.
Agentless: No need to install software on the managed nodes,
simplifying management and security.
Idempotent: Playbooks can be run multiple times without causing
undesirable or unintended effects.
Large community and support: Ansible benefits from a vast
community and an abundance of resources and modules.
Introduction
A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t
Ansible Installation
A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t
The inventory file is a configuration document used by Ansible to list
and organize the hosts and server groups on which tasks and
playbooks will be executed.
Ansible communicates with remote nodes using SSH for Unix/Linux
systems and WinRM for Windows systems, enabling secure and
efficient management of configurations and automations remotely.
Inventory
A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t
This command sends a ping to all the hosts defined in inventory.ini to
verify that Ansible can connect to them correctly.
Ansible Ping
A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t
Playbooks
A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t
An Ansible playbook is a YAML file describing the tasks to be
executed on the servers.
This playbook targets the servers group in your inventory file and
executes a task to install Apache on the machines in this group.
Tasks
A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t
Tasks are the basic units of action in an Ansible playbook. They
define what you want to achieve on the targeted hosts.
This task updates the packages on an Ubuntu server using the apt
module. Ansible has a wide range of modules for various tasks. For
example, to manage files, use the file module.
Variables
A n t o n y K e r v a z o - C a n u t

=== SOURCE: Ansible — Feb 2025 ===
1

Top 12 Ansible Playbooks Best Practices 
Ansible is a powerful automation tool that uses YAML-based Playbooks to define 
the desired state of systems and applications. Writing effective Playbooks is 
essential for maintainability, reusability, and ensuring predictable behavior across 
various environments.

2

1. Clear Naming Conventions 
• Use meaningful, descriptive names for playbooks, tasks, variables, and files. 
• Follow consistent naming patterns (e.g., lower case with underscores). 
Example: 
--- 
- name: Install and configure Apache

hosts: webservers

tasks:

- name: Install Apache

apt:

name: apache2

state: present 
Best Practices: 
• Always name tasks so they clearly state what they do. 
• Variable names should be consistent and clear.

2. Modular Design (Use Roles & Includes) 
• Organize playbooks into reusable roles for better scalability and structure. 
• Roles help to break large playbooks into smaller, manageable pieces. 
Directory Structure: 
├── site.yml 
├── roles/ 
│ ├── apache/ 
│ │ ├── tasks/

3

│ │ │ └── main.yml 
│ │ ├── handlers/ 
│ │ │ └── main.yml 
│ │ ├── templates/ 
│ │ └── files/ 
Example: 
--- 
- hosts: webservers

roles:

- role: apache 
Best Practices: 
• Break down tasks into logical roles (e.g., apache, mysql, security). 
• Use includes and imports to split large playbooks.

3. Avoid Hardcoding (Use Variables and Defaults) 
• Define variables to avoid hardcoding values and increase flexibility. 
• Group variables in vars files or use group_vars for specific environments. 
Example: 
--- 
- name: Install a specific version of Apache

hosts: webservers

vars:

apache_version: "2.4.29"

tasks:

4

- name: Install Apache

apt:

name: apache2={{ apache_version }}

state: present 
Best Practices: 
• Use variable files to separate environment-specific variables (e.g., 
group_vars/, host_vars/). 
• Provide default values using defaults/main.yml within roles.

4. Reuse Existing Roles 
• Use publicly available roles from Ansible Galaxy to speed up development. 
• Before creating new roles, check if community roles meet your 
requirements. 
Example of Installing a Role: 
ansible-galaxy install geerlingguy.apache 
Best Practices: 
• Always review and test Galaxy roles before integrating them. 
• Customize roles as needed, but avoid modifying the role’s core logic unless 
necessary.

5. Use Vault for Sensitive Data 
• Ansible Vault should be used for securely storing sensitive information such 
as passwords, API keys, and other confidential data. 
Example of Vault Usage: 
ansible-vault create secrets.yml

5

Example Playbook: 
yaml 
Copy code 
--- 
- name: Deploy application with sensitive data

hosts: webservers

vars_files:

- secrets.yml

tasks:

- name: Use sensitive data

debug:

msg: "Password is {{ vault_db_password }}" 
Best Practices: 
• Use ansible-vault to encrypt sensitive variables (e.g., database passwords, 
credentials). 
• Keep encrypted files separate and avoid including them in version control 
withou

=== SOURCE: Ansible — Mar 2025 ===
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

Ansible Playbook Essentials
Design automation blueprints using Ansible's playbooks 
to orchestrate and manage your multitier infrastructure
Gourav Shah
BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

Ansible Playbook Essentials
Copyright © 2015 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embedded in 
critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy 
of the information presented. However, the information contained in this book is 
sold without warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt 
Publishing, and its dealers and distributors will be held liable for any damages 
caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the 
companies and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. 
However, Packt Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: August 2015
Production reference: 1290715
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-78439-829-3
www.packtpub.com
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Gourav Shah
Reviewers
Ajey Gore
Olivier Korver
Ben Mildren
Aditya Patawari
Acquisition Editor
Vinay Argekar
Content Development Editor
Amey Varangaonkar
Technical Editor
Abhishek R. Kotian
Copy Editors
Pranjali Chury
Neha Vyas
Project Coordinator
Suzanne Coutinho
Proofreader
Safis Editing
Indexer
Monica Ajmera Mehta
Graphics
Jason Monteiro
Production Coordinator
Nilesh R. Mohite
Cover Work
Nilesh R. Mohite
www.allitebooks.com
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Gourav Shah (www.gouravshah.com) has extensive experience in building and 
managing highly available, automated, fault-tolerant infrastructure and scaling it. 
He started his career as a passionate Linux and open source enthusiast, transformed 
himself into an operations engineer, and evolved to be a cloud and DevOps expert 
and trainer.
In his previous avatar, Gourav headed IT operations for Efficient Frontier

(now Adobe), India. He founded Initcron Systems (
www.initcron.com), a niche 
consulting firm that specializes in DevOps enablement and cloud infrastructure 
management. Under the Initcron banner, he helps companies design DevOps 
strategies and helps implement them. Initcron also provides automation services for 
start-ups, as well as large enterprises.
Gourav is a coveted corporate trainer and has trained professionals from top 
IT companies around the world, such as IBM, CISCO, Qualcomm, Accenture, 
Dreamworks, Walmart Labs, Intuit, and Wells Fargo, to name a few. He runs a 
specialized training school by the name School of Devops (


=== SOURCE: Basic Terraform Commands Command Description terraform init Initializes a new… ===
굓굔굕굖 Basic Terraform Commands 
Command Description 
terraform init Initializes a new or existing Terraform conﬁguration. 
terraform plan Creates an execution plan to preview changes. 
terraform apply Applies the desired infrastructure changes. 
terraform destroy Destroys all resources managed by Terraform. 
terraform show Displays details about Terraform’s state or execution plan. 
terraform output Shows values of deﬁned output variables.

굓굔굕굖 Intermediate Terraform Commands 
Command Description 
terraform state list Lists all resources managed in Terraform state. 
terraform state show <resource> Shows details of a speciﬁc resource. 
terraform state mv <old> <new> Moves a resource within the state ﬁle. 
terraform state rm <resource> Removes a resource from Terraform state. 
terraform import <resource> <id> Imports an existing resource into Terraform. 
terraform taint <resource> Marks a resource for replacement on the next apply. 
terraform untaint <resource> Removes the taint from a resource.

굓굔굕굖 Advanced Terraform Commands 
Command Description 
terraform fmt Formats Terraform ﬁles to follow best practices. 
terraform validate Validates the syntax and conﬁguration. 
terraform graph Generates a graph of the Terraform dependency structure. 
terraform workspace new <name> Creates a new Terraform workspace. 
terraform workspace list Lists available workspaces. 
Command Description 
terraform workspace select <name> Switches to a diƯerent workspace. 
terraform refresh Updates Terraform state with real infrastructure status. 
terraform force-unlock <lock-id> Forces Terraform to unlock the state. 
terraform apply -target=<resource> Applies changes to a speciﬁc resource. 
terraform plan -destroy Shows a destruction plan without applying it. 
terraform apply -var="name=value" Overrides variable values during execution. 
terraform apply -parallelism=N Limits concurrent operations. 
terraform console Opens an interactive Terraform console. 
terraform debug Enables debug mode for troubleshooting. 
terraform test Runs Terraform test cases (for Terraform 1.6+). 
terraform login Authenticates to Terraform Cloud. 
terraform logout Removes stored credentials for Terraform Cloud.

굓굔굕굖 Less Common Terraform Commands 
Command Description 
terraform providers Lists required providers. 
terraform force-unlock <lock-id> Unlocks Terraform state manually. 
terraform providers lock Locks provider versions in .terraform.lock.. 
terraform providers mirror <dir> Mirrors provider binaries to a directory. 
terraform workspace delete <name> Deletes a Terraform workspace. 
terraform providers schema Outputs the JSON schema of providers. 
terraform show -json Outputs Terraform state in JSON format. 
terraform output -json Shows Terraform output in JSON format. 
terraform state pull Retrieves the current state as a JSON ﬁle. 
terraform state push <stateﬁle> Overwrites the current Terraform state.

굓굔굕굖 Terraform Enterprise & Cloud Commands 
Command Description 
terraform cloud

=== SOURCE: Error Handling in Ansible Playbooks: Error Handling in Ansible Playbooks: A… ===
Error Handling in Ansible Playbooks:

Error Handling in Ansible Playbooks: A Beginner-Friendly Explanation 
Ansible is a tool used to automate tasks like setting up servers, installing software, or managing 
configurations. A playbook is like a recipe that lists all the steps for Ansible to follow. Sometimes, 
things can go wrong when running these tasks—like a server being unreachable or a file not being 
found. Error handling in Ansible ensures the playbook doesn't stop completely when something fails 
and allows you to manage failures gracefully. 
Here’s a simple explanation of error-handling concepts in Ansible:

Why Do Errors Happen in Playbooks? 
Errors can occur because: 
• A server is offline. 
• A file or package needed for a task doesn’t exist. 
• Permissions are missing. 
• A command fails (e.g., trying to start a service that's not installed).

How Does Error Handling Work in Ansible? 
Ansible has built-in ways to deal with these errors. You can: 
1. Ignore Errors: Tell Ansible to skip a task even if it fails. 
2. Retry Tasks: Try running a task again if it fails the first time. 
3. Run Custom Actions After a Failure: Take specific actions, like logging the error or notifying 
someone. 
Key Features of Ansible Error Handling 
1. ignore_errors: yes 
Use this to ignore a failure in a task and let the playbook continue.

failed_when: 
Define when a task should be considered a failure. Useful when a task might technically succeed but 
doesn’t meet your conditions.

block, rescue, and always 
Like a safety net, these let you define tasks to do if something fails: 
• block: The main set of tasks. 
• rescue: What to do if any block task fails. 
• always: Actions that should always run, no matter what

register and when 
Save the result of a task and run other tasks only if a specific condition is met.

Retries with until 
Keep trying a task until it succeeds or a maximum number of retries is reached.

Why Is Error Handling Important? 
Without error handling: 
• The playbook might stop at the first failure, leaving tasks incomplete. 
• Debugging can become harder if failures aren’t logged properly. 
• Automation becomes less reliable. 
With proper error handling: 
• Your automation becomes robust and flexible. 
• You can identify and fix issues faster.

=== SOURCE: FROM SCRATCH TO ADVANCE VISHAL MACHAN MAIL ID : vishalmachan15@gmail.com… ===
FROM SCRATCH TO ADVANCE

VISHAL MACHAN

MAIL ID : vishalmachan15@gmail.com

LINKEDIN: www.linkedin.com/in/machan-vishal

2025

Table of Contents: Ansible Deep Dive Guide 
##

Introduction to Ansible 
1. Basic Concepts

- Control Node

- Managed Nodes

- Inventory

- Playbooks

- Plays

- Roles

- Tasks

- Handlers

- Modules

- Plugins

- Collections

##

2. Build Your Inventory

- Basic Inventory

- Adding Variables to Inventory

- Group Variables within Inventory

- Variable Syntax

- Grouping Inventory by Platform

- Verifying the Inventory

- Protecting Sensitive Variables with `ansible-vault`

##

3. Ansible Architecture: Master Node, Slave Node, and Tower Deep Dive

- Control Node and Managed Nodes Setup

- How Ansible Tower/AWX Works

- Tower Components and Workflow

##

4. Ansible Playbooks with Explanation

a. Sample Full-fledged Playbook

b. Master and Slave Playbook Scenario

c. Playbook Integration with Ansible Tower

##

5. Network Automation: Advanced Topics

- Network Resource Modules

- Module States

- Using Network Modules

- Example: Config Verification

- Example: VLAN Management

- Ansible Network Examples

- Prerequisites

- Inventory Groups and Variables

- Example 1: Collection Facts & Backups

- Example 2: Cross-platform Modules

- Implementation Notes

- Troubleshooting

- Parsing Semi-Structured Text

- CLI Parser Basics

- Parsing CLI Output

- Advanced Parsing Use Cases

- Data Validation with Ansible

- Using the `validate` Plugin

- Structuring & Validating Data

- Network Debug and Troubleshooting Guide

- General Troubleshooting

- Shell Issues

- Socket/Path Errors

- Timeout Errors

- Proxy & Miscellaneous Issues

Ansible: From Scratch to Deep Dive

1.

Introduction to Ansible 
Ansible is an open-source IT automation tool developed by Red Hat that enables: 
• Configuration Management 
• Application Deployment 
• Orchestration 
• Provisioning 
• Continuous Delivery 
It uses simple YAML files (called playbooks) and does not require an agent to be installed on target 
machines, making it lightweight and easy to manage.

Basic Concepts

Control Node 
• The machine where Ansible is installed and from where commands are executed. 
• This is the central orchestrator that pushes instructions to other systems (managed nodes) via 
SSH.

Managed Nodes 
• The remote machines (servers, VMs, etc.) that Ansible manages. 
• No need to install an agent; communication happens over SSH or Win-RM (for Windows).

Inventory 
• A file (usually hosts) that defines which machines are managed. 
• Can be static (INI/YAML) or dynamic (using scripts or plugins).

• Example: 
• [webservers] 
• web1.example.com 
• web2.example.com

Playbooks 
• YAML files that define what needs to be done. 
• Each consists of one or more plays, each targeting a group of hosts with defined tasks. 
• Example: 
• - hosts: webservers 
•

tasks: 
•

- name: Install nginx 
•

apt: 
•

name: nginx 
•

state: present

Plays 
• A play maps a group of hosts to tasks. 


=== SOURCE: Project Author: Marianne Gleason Page 1 ANSIBLE PROJECT ON AWS You are a Devops ===
Project Author: Marianne Gleason Page 1

ANSIBLE PROJECT ON AWS

You are a Devops Engineer and the organization you are working on needs to set up two configuration 
management server groups. One for Apache another for Nginx. Being a Devops Engineer it is your task 
to deal with this configuration management issue.

Let us see the tasks that you need to perform using Ansible.

1. Create two Server Groups. One for Apache and another for Nginx. 
2. Push two html files with their server information.

Make sure that you don’t forget to start the services once the installation is done. Also send post 
installation messages for both the server groups.

Using Ansible Roles accomplish the above the tasks.

Also, once the Apache server configuration is done you need to install Java on that server group using 
ansible role in a playbook.

WHAT IS ANSIBLE? 
Ansible is an automation and orchestration tool popular for its simplicity of installation, ease of use in 
what concerns the connectivity to clients, its lack of agent for ansible clients and the multitude of skills. 
Ansible supports the deployment and infrastructure management phases of the DevOps lifecycle, 
automating such tasks as configuration management, infrastructure provisioning, and application 
deployment. 
Ansible functions by connecting via SSH to the clients, so it doesn't need a special agent on the client-
side, and by pushing modules to the clients. The modules are then executed locally, on the client-side, 
and the output is pushed back to the Ansible server. 
Since it uses SSH, it can very easily connect to clients using SSH-Keys, simplifying though the whole 
process. Client details, like hostnames or IP addresses and SSH ports, are stored in files called inventory 
files. Once you have created an inventory file and populated it, ansible can use it.

Project Author: Marianne Gleason Page 2

How Ansible Will Work In This Project

Project Author: Marianne Gleason Page 3

Step 1. Configure 3 VMs on AWS. One ansible (master) and two worker nodes (apache (node1) and 
nginx (node2))

Step 2. Install ansible by including the following commands in a script file, ansible.sh in the master 
(ansible) and run script file via bash ansible.sh 
Check node1 and node2 to verify that python3 --version is installed. 
sudo apt update 
sudo apt install software-properties-common 
sudo apt-add-repository --yes --update ppa:ansible/ansible 
sudo apt install ansible 
Step 3. ssh connection into node1 and node2 from the master. See commands below 
cd 
cd .ssh 
ls 
ssh-keygen 
cat id_rsa.pub

On node:

cd .ssh 
sudo nano authorized_key

Note: paste key save & exit

Step 4. Check ssh connection – both were successful 
ssh ubuntu@3.133.86.114 – this is public ip address for node1 
ssh ubuntu@18.217.54.29 – this is public ip address for node2

Project Author: Marianne Gleason Page 4

Step 5. Configure host file for two server groups. 
Change to ansible directory and the host file 
cd /etc/ansible 
ls 
Sudo nano

=== SOURCE: Subhabrata Panda | 1 MASTERING INFRASTRUCTURE AS CODE SUBHABRATA PANDA… ===
Subhabrata Panda

| 1

MASTERING INFRASTRUCTURE AS CODE

SUBHABRATA PANDA

Subhabrata Panda

| 2

A B O U T M E

I am Subhabrata Panda, a passionate DevOps and Cloud Enthusiast, with a strong foundation in Terraform, 
AWS, and cutting -edge cloud technologies.I have consistently demonstrated expertise in deploying scalable, 
secure, and efficient infrastructure solutions. 
With hands-on experience implementing Infrastructure as Code (IaC) using Terraform, I have successfully 
worked on projects that include building secure CI/CD pipelines, managing multi -tier applications, and 
optimizing cloud deployments.

This e -book reflects my commitment to making complex infrastructure concepts accessible and actionable. 
Whether you are a beginner or an experienced professional, my goal is to provide you with the tools and insights 
needed to excel in modern cloud-based DevOps practices. 
Feel free to connect with me at panda.subhabrata2003@gmail.com to discuss ideas, share feedback, or 
collaborate on exciting projects!

Subhabrata Panda

| 3 
I N D E X

1. P R E R E Q U I S I T E S

7

2. I N T R O DUC T I O N 7

3. I A C – I N F R A S T R U C T U R E A S C O D E 9

4. I N S TA L L T E R R A F O R M O N W I N D O W S 10

5. I N S TA L L T E R R A F O R M O N M A C / U B U N T U 1 2

6 . C H O O S E T H E P R O V I D E R 1 3

7 . S E T U P AW S A C C O U N T 1 4

8 . AW S D A S H B O A R D 1 6

9 . AW S U S E R S E T U P 1 7

10 . D O W N L O A D AW S O N W I N D O W S 2 1

1 1 . AW S C L I C O N F I G U R AT I O N F O R V S C O D E 2 3

1 2 . AW S E C 2 W I T H T E R R A F O R M

1 1 . 1 A M I

1 1 . 2 t e r r a f o r m p l a n

1 1 . 3 t e r r a f o r m a p p l y

1 1 . 4 t e r r a f o r m d e s t r o y

1 1 . 5 t e r r a f o r m d e s t r o y - a u t o— a p p r o v e

1 1 . 6 t e r r a f o r m v a l i d a t e 
2 6

1 3 . R E S O U R C E C H A N G E 3 3

1 4 . VA R I A B L E S I N T E R R A F O R M

1 3 . 1 S y n t a x 
3 4

1 5 . O U T P U T I N T E R R A F O R M 3 6

1 6 . I M P L E M E N T S 3 B U C K E T W I T H T H E H E L P O F T E R R A F O R M

1 5 . 1 I n t r o d u c t i o n o f S 3 B u c k e t 
3 7

Subhabrata Panda

| 4

1 7 .

R A N D O M P R O V I D E R

1 6 . 1 S y n t a x

40

1 8 . T E R R A F O R M R E M O T E S TAT E M A N A G E M E N T

1 7 . 1 K e y p o i n t s

1 7 . 2 S y n t a x 
4 3

1 9 . P R O J E C T 1 - D E P L OY S TAT I C W E B S I T E O N AW S U S I N G S 3

B U C K E T

1 8 . 1 R e f e r e n c e

1 8 . 2 Wo r k i n g 
4 5

20 . U N D E R S TA N D V P C F O R T E R R A F O R M I M P L E M E N TAT I O N

1 9 . 1 V P C C I D R B l o c k

1 9 . 2 I n t e r n e t G a t e w a y

1 9 . 3 R o u t e T a b l e s

1 9 . 4 S e c u r i t y T a r g e t G r o u p s

1 9 . 5 N A C L

1 9 . 6 S u b n e t s

1 9 . 7 N A T G a t e w a y

1 9 . 8 A W S P e e r i n g

1 9 . 9 R o u t e 5 3 
4 8

2 1 . I M P L E M E N T I N G V P C U S I N G T E R R A F O R M

2 0 . 1 I n t r o d u c t i o n 
5 4

2 2 . D ATA R E S O U R C E

2 1 . 1 R e a l

=== SOURCE: Summary of Terraform Associate Exam Preparation bullet points PART 1: 1.… ===
Summary of Terraform Associate Exam Preparation 
bullet points

PART 1: 
1. Understanding Providers & Initialization 
• Providers define how Terraform interacts with cloud platforms (e.g., AWS, Azure). 
• After defining a provider, terraform init is required to initialize the working 
directory and download necessary plugins. 
• Provider plugins are stored in the .terraform directory under 
registry.terraform.io/hashicorp/aws. 
2. Is the Provider Block Mandatory? 
• No, the provider block is not mandatory if it is empty (i.e., no specific configurations 
like region or credentials). 
• Terraform can infer the required provider through the required_providers block. 
• However, a provider itself is mandatory for creating resources. 
3. Using Provider Aliases 
• Aliases allow multiple configurations of the same provider for different regions or 
accounts. 
• Example:

provider "aws" {

region = "ap-southeast-1" 
}

provider "aws" {

alias = "mumbai"

region = "ap-south-1" 
}

resource "aws_instance" "example" {

provider = aws.mumbai 
} 
4. Best Practices for Credentials 
• Storing credentials inside the provider block is not recommended. 
• Use environment variables or external authentication mechanisms instead.

5. Terraform Settings (terraform Block) 
• Contains:

o required_version: Specifies Terraform version (e.g., >= 1.2.0). 
o required_providers: Defines provider dependencies and versions. 
o Backend Configuration: To be discussed in later sessions. 
6. Key Terraform Commands 
• terraform init → Initializes working directory and downloads providers. 
• terraform init -upgrade → Upgrades provider versions based on constraints. 
• terraform plan → Creates an execution plan but does not modify state. 
• terraform apply → Applies changes and modifies the state file. 
• terraform destroy → Removes Terraform-managed infrastructure. 
• terraform fmt → Formats configuration files.

o terraform fmt -check → Checks formatting without modifying files. 
o terraform fmt -recursive → Formats files in subdirectories. 
7. Version Constraints & Provider Tiers 
• Version constraints use operators like >=, <=, ~>. 
• Providers are categorized into:

o Official (maintained by HashiCorp) 
o Partner (verified by third-party vendors) 
o Community (custom providers) 
8. State File & Terraform Behavior 
• The default Terraform state file is terraform.tfstate. 
• Terraform plan does not modify the state file. 
• Destroying infrastructure can be done either via:

o terraform destroy 
o Removing a resource from .tf files and running terraform apply.

PART 2: 
1. Terraform Validate (terraform validate) 
• Validates Terraform configuration files in the directory. 
• Requires an initialized directory (terraform init must be run first). 
• terraform plan also includes an implicit validation check, so terraform 
validate is not always necessary. 
2. Terraform Refresh (terraform refresh) 
• Reads current settings of managed resources and updates the state file to match 
them

=== SOURCE: TERRAFORM COMPLETE NOTES 1. Introduction to Terraform What is Terraform?… ===
TERRAFORM COMPLETE NOTES

1. Introduction to Terraform

What is Terraform?

Terraform, developed by HashiCorp, is an open-source Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool that allows 
users to define, provision, and manage infrastructure resources through configuration files. These 
resources can be physical or virtual components like servers, databases, networking components, 
storage, or even Kubernetes clusters. The configurations are written in a declarative language known 
as HashiCorp Configuration Language (HCL), which is both easy to learn and highly expressive.

The beauty of Terraform lies in its ability to abstract infrastructure management into a simplified, 
declarative model. Instead of manually provisioning resources through cloud provider dashboards, or 
writing scripts to automate them, you can simply describe what your infrastructure should look like, 
and Terraform handles the rest.

Terraform is widely used because it can manage infrastructure across various cloud providers such as

AWS, Azure, Google Cloud, and even on-premises environments using providers like VMware and 
OpenStack. With Terraform, you can manage all your infrastructure in one place, regardless of the 
provider.

Infrastructure as Code (IaC)

To better understand Terraform, it’s important to grasp the concept of Infrastructure as Code (IaC). 
IaC allows you to automate the provisioning and management of infrastructure in a declarative or 
imperative manner using code. Instead of configuring each resource manually (via cloud consoles or 
command-line interfaces), you describe the desired state of your infrastructure, and the IaC tool (like 
Terraform) will provision it for you.

Here are some key benefits of IaC:

• Consistency: Ensures the same infrastructure setup across multiple environments 
(development, staging, production).

• Version Control: Infrastructure configurations can be stored in version control systems like 
Git, making it easy to track changes over time, roll back if necessary, and collaborate with 
other team members.

• Automation: Infrastructure can be deployed or modified in seconds or minutes, reducing the 
risk of human error.

How Terraform Works

Terraform operates using providers to interact with infrastructure APIs (like AWS or Azure APIs). 
Here's a simplified view of how Terraform works:

1. Configuration Files: You define the desired state of your infrastructure in .tf files using HCL.

2. Terraform Plan: Terraform compares your desired configuration with the current 
infrastructure state to generate a plan of action.

3. Terraform Apply: Terraform applies the changes defined in the plan by interacting with cloud 
provider APIs to provision, update, or destroy resources.

4. State File: Terraform tracks the resources it manages through a state file (terraform.tfstate). 
This state file acts as a record of what Terraform has done, allowing it to manage future 
changes incrementally.

2. Why Use Terraform?

a. Multi-Cloud Support

One of

=== SOURCE: Terraform Interview Mastery: Advanced Q&A, Real- World Scenarios & Pro Tips for ===
Terraform Interview Mastery: Advanced Q&A, Real-
World Scenarios & Pro Tips for 3+ Years Experienced 
& Certified DevOps Engineers

Nuthan Gatla

1

What is Terraform and How it works? 
Terraform is an open-source Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool developed by HashiCorp. It 
allows you to define, provision, and manage infrastructure across various cloud providers 
and services using a declarative configuration language known as HashiCorp Configuration 
Language (HCL). 
How Does Terraform Work? (Workflow) 
"Terraform follows a simple three-step workflow:" 
Write – We define infrastructure in HCL, specifying cloud resources like VMs, networks, 
and databases. 
Plan – Terraform generates an execution plan (terraform plan) to show the changes before 
applying them. 
Apply – Terraform provisions and manages resources (terraform apply). It maintains a state 
file to track infrastructure changes.

A DevOps Engineer manually created infrastructure on AWS, and now there is a 
requirement to use Terraform to manage it. How would you import these resources in 
Terraform code?

2

"If an AWS infrastructure was manually created and we now need Terraform to manage it 
without recreating resources, we use the terraform import command. This allows us to 
bring existing AWS resources under Terraform’s management. "

2. Step-by-Step Process

To import existing AWS resources into Terraform, we follow these steps: 
Step 1: Initialize Terraform 
"First, we create a Terraform configuration file (main.tf) and initialize Terraform." 
provider "aws" {

region = "us-east-1" 
} 
Command: 
terraform init 
Step 2: Identify the Existing AWS Resource 
"Next, we find the resource details using AWS CLI or AWS Console. For example, if we 
are importing an EC2 instance, we get its Instance ID:"

3

aws ec2 describe-instances –query 
"Reservations[*].Instances[*].InstanceId" 
Step 3: Define a Matching Terraform Resource 
"We write a Terraform configuration matching the resource but without unnecessary 
attributes." 
resource "aws_instance" "existing_instance" {

ami

= "ami-0c55b159cbfafe1f0"

instance_type = "t2.micro" 
} 
Step 4: Import the Resource into Terraform State 
"Now, we use the terraform import command to sync the AWS resource with 
Terraform’s state." 
terraform import aws_instance.existing_instance i-0abcdef1234567890

This does not modify the resource but allows Terraform to track it. 
Step 5: Verify the Import and Update Configuration 
"After importing, we run terraform show to see the current state and update main.tf if 
needed." 
terraform show > temp.tf 
Step 6: Plan and Apply 
"Finally, we verify everything using terraform plan and apply changes safely." 
terraform plan 
terraform apply

You have multiple environments - dev, stage, prod for your application and you want to 
use the same code for all of these environment. How can you do that?

Approach 1: Using Terraform Workspaces (Recommended for Simple Cases) 
4

Terraform workspaces allow you to use the same 

=== SOURCE: Terraform Walkthrough What is IaC? Infrastructure as code (IaC) means to manage ===
Terraform Walkthrough
What is IaC?
Infrastructure as code (IaC) means to manage your IT infrastructure using configuration files.
Why IaC?
Historically, managing IT infrastructure was a manual process. People would physically put servers in place and configure them. Only after the 
machines were configured to the correct settings required by the OS and dependencies would those people deploy the application.
Businesses are making a transition where traditionally-managed infrastructure can no longer meet the demands of today’s businesses. IT 
organizations are quickly adopting the public cloud, which is predominantly API-driven.
To meet customer demands and save costs, application teams are architecting their applications to support a much higher level of elasticity, 
supporting technology like containers and public cloud resources. These resources may only live for a matter of hours; therefore the traditional 
method of raising a ticket to request resources is no longer a viable option.
Benefits of IaC
Speed
IaC benefits a company’s IT architecture and workflow as it uses automation to substantially increase the provisioning speed of the infrastructure’
s development, testing, and production.
Consistency
Since it is code, it generates the same result every time. It provisioned the same environment every time, enabling improved infrastructure 
consistency at all times.
Cost
One of the main benefits of IaC is, without a doubt, lowering the costs of infrastructure management. With everything automated and organized, 
engineers save up on time and cost which can be wisely invested in performing other manual tasks and higher-value jobs.
Minimum Risk
IaC allows server configuration that can be documented, logged, and tracked later for reference. Configuration files will be reviewed by a person 
or policy as a code (sentinel) for security leakages.
Everything Codified
The main benefit of IaC is explicit coding to configure files in use. You can share codes with the team, test them to ensure accuracy, maintain 
uniformity and update your infrastructure into the same flow of IaC.
Version Controlled, Integrated
Since the infrastructure configurations are codified, we can check-in into version control like GitHub and start versioning it.
IaC allows you to track and give insight on what, who, when, and why anything changed in the process of deployment. This has more 
transparency which we lack in traditional infrastructure management.
Now, we know what is Infrastructure as Code means, now let’s deep dive into Terraform...
Terraform
Terraform is a tool for building, changing, and versioning infrastructure safely and efficiently. Terraform can manage existing and popular service 
providers as well as custom in-house solutions.
Provider
A provider is responsible for understanding API interactions and exposing resources.
Most of the available providers correspond to one cloud or on-premises infrastructure platform and offers resource types that correspond to each

=== SOURCE: Terraform — Mar 2025 ===
1. What does the terraform init command do? 
Ans -> 
The terraform init command initializes a Terraform working directory. It performs the 
following tasks: 
 Downloads Provider Plugins: It installs the necessary provider plugins (e.g., AWS, 
Azure, GCP) that are defined in the configuration files. 
 Initializes Backend: If a backend is configured (e.g., for storing Terraform state), it 
initializes the connection to that backend. 
 Installs Modules: If modules are used in the Terraform configuration, it downloads 
and installs the required modules. 
 Prepares the Environment: Sets up the working directory for use with subsequent 
Terraform commands, such as terraform plan or terraform apply. 
In short, terraform init sets up the necessary components for Terraform to interact with 
the cloud environment defined in your configuration. 
2. What does the terraform plan command do? 
Ans ->

Purpose: It generates an execution plan, showing what changes Terraform will make to 
your infrastructure. 
Functionality: 
 Compares the desired state defined in your configuration files with the current 
state of the infrastructure (from the state file). 
 Outputs a detailed list of actions that will be performed (e.g., resources to be 
created, updated, or destroyed). 
 Helps to verify and preview changes before applying them. 
In summary: terraform plan shows a preview of the changes. 
3. What does the terraform apply command do? 
Ans -> 
Purpose: It applies the changes required to reach the desired state of the 
infrastructure. 
Functionality: 
 Executes the actions proposed in the plan (or automatically generates and 
applies the plan if no plan is provided). 
 Makes actual changes to the infrastructure based on the configuration, such as 
creating, modifying, or destroying resources. 
 Once the changes are applied, it updates the state file to reflect the current 
infrastructure state.

In summary: terraform apply actually makes the changes to your infrastructure. 
4. Explain about Terraform provider block. 
Ans ->

In Terraform, the provider block specifies the platform (like AWS, Azure, GCP) that 
Terraform will interact with. It handles: 
 Platform Configuration: Defines where and how Terraform will manage 
resources (e.g., AWS, Azure, etc.). 
 Authentication: Contains credentials to connect to the platform. 
 Region/Project Settings: Specifies regional or project-level details for resource 
management. 
 Multiple Providers: Allows managing resources across different platforms in 
one configuration. 
 Example: 
provider "aws" {

region

= "us-west-2"

access_key = "YOUR_ACCESS_KEY"

secret_key = "YOUR_SECRET_KEY" 
} 
provider "azurerm" {

features {} 
} 
provider "google" {

credentials = file("file-path.json")

project

= "my-project-id"

region

= "us-central1" 
}

5. Explain about Terraform resource block. 
Ans -> 
In Terraform, a resource block is used to define infrastructure components like servers, 
networks, or databases. It tells 

=== SOURCE: Terraform: From Beginner To Master: With Examples In AWS Kevin Holditch This… ===
Terraform: From Beginner To Master: With
Examples In AWS
Kevin Holditch
This book is for sale at http://leanpub.com/terraform-from-beginner-to-master
This version was published on 2020-09-30
This is a Leanpub book. Leanpub empowers authors and publishers with the Lean Publishing
process. Lean Publishing is the act of publishing an in-progress ebook using lightweight tools and
many iterations to get reader feedback, pivot until you have the right book and build traction once
you do.
© 2019 - 2020 Kevin Holditch
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Thanks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 1 - Introduction to Terraform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
What is Terraform? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Issues with configuring infrastructure manually . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Terraform to the rescue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Why not just use CloudFormation? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
What about Chef and Puppet, don’t they solve this problem? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Chapter 2 - Installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Installation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Setting up your free A WS Account . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Setup an A WS user for use with Terraform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Setup an A WS Credentials file . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Install JetBrains IntelliJ Community Edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Chapter 3 - Your First Terraform Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Code samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Setting up your first project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Creating your first infrastructure with Terraform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Chapter 4 - Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Resources in detail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Interpolation syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Chapter 5 - Providers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

=== SOURCE: Top 45 Terraform Interview Questions & Answers for DevOps Jobs in 2025 1.… ===
Top 45 Terraform Interview Questions & 
Answers for DevOps Jobs in 2025 
1. Terraform Basics 
1. What is Terraform, and how does it work? 
o Terraform is an Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool that automates cloud 
resource provisioning using declarative configuration files. 
2. What are the key components of Terraform? 
o Providers (AWS, Azure, GCP), Modules, State Files, Resources, 
Variables, Outputs. 
3. What is the difference between Terraform and other IaC tools like Ansible? 
o Terraform is declarative and focuses on infrastructure provisioning, while 
Ansible is imperative and mainly used for configuration management. 
4. What is the Terraform workflow? 
o terraform init → terraform plan → terraform apply → terraform destroy. 
5. How does Terraform maintain the state of infrastructure? 
o Terraform stores infrastructure state in a tfstate file, which helps track 
resources. 
6. What is a Terraform provider? 
o A plugin that interacts with cloud services like AWS, Azure, or GCP . 
7. How do you initialize a Terraform project? 
o terraform init initializes Terraform and downloads provider plugins. 
8. What is the use of terraform plan? 
o It shows the changes Terraform will make before applying them. 
9. How do you apply changes in Terraform? 
o terraform apply executes the plan and provisions resources. 
10. How do you destroy all Terraform-managed resources? 
• terraform destroy deletes all resources defined in the configuration.

2. Terraform State Management 
11. What is Terraform state, and why is it important? 
• Terraform state tracks deployed infrastructure and maps it to real-world 
resources. 
12. Where can Terraform store state files? 
• Locally (terraform.tfstate) or remotely (S3, Azure Blob, Terraform Cloud). 
13. How do you enable remote state storage in Terraform? 
• By configuring a backend, e.g., for AWS S3: 
hcl 
CopyEdit 
terraform {

backend "s3" {

bucket = "terraform-state-bucket"

key

= "terraform.tfstate"

region = "us-east-1"

} 
} 
14. What happens if multiple users modify the same Terraform state file? 
• State locking (using DynamoDB for S3 backend) prevents conflicts. 
15. How do you refresh the Terraform state file? 
• terraform refresh updates the state file with real-world resources. 
16. How do you manually remove a resource from the state file? 
• terraform state rm <resource_name>. 
17. How do you list all resources in the Terraform state? 
• terraform state list. 
18. How do you move a resource from one state to another? 
• Using terraform state mv <source> <destination>. 
19. What is drift detection in Terraform? 
• It detects manual changes to infrastructure that differ from Terraform’s state. 
20. What is the use of terraform taint? 
• Marks a resource for forced recreation in the next terraform apply.

3. Terraform Variables & Modules 
21. What are Terraform variables? 
• Variables allow parameterizing Terraform configurations. 
22. How do you define and use variables in Terraform? 
• Define: 
hcl 
Cop

=== SOURCE: What Is Ansible? Ansible is an open-source tool for resource provisioning… ===
What Is Ansible?

Ansible is an open-source tool for resource provisioning automation that aids 
DevOps teams in continuous delivery. 
nsible is an open-source, cross-platform tool for resource provisioning automation 
that DevOps professionals popularly use for continuous delivery of software code by 
taking advantage of an “infrastructure as code” approach. This article explains 
Ansible’s functioning, architecture, and features in detail. It also discusses what 
Ansible is used for in a modern, digital environment.

Ansible is an open-source, cross-platform tool for resource provisioning automation 
that DevOps professionals popularly use for continuous delivery of software code by 
taking advantage of an “infrastructure as code” approach. This article explains 
Ansible’s functioning, architecture, and features in detail. It also discusses what 
Ansible is used for in a modern, digital environment.

What Is Ansible? 
Ansible is defined as an open-source, cross-platform tool for resource 
provisioning automation that DevOps professionals popularly use for 
continuous delivery of software code by taking advantage of an “infrastructure 
as code” approach. Over the years, the Ansible automation platform has evolved to 
deliver sophisticated automation solutions for operators, administrators, and IT 
decision-makers across various technical disciplines. It’s a leading enterprise 
automation solution with flourishing open-source software and the unofficial 
standard in IT automated systems. It operates on several Unix-like platforms and can 
manage systems like Unix and Microsoft architectures. It comes with descriptive 
language for describing system settings. Michael DeHaan created Ansible, which Red 
Hat acquired in 2015.

Page1

Ansible is an agentless system that executes actions over remote SSH or Windows 
Remote Management connections (allowing remote PowerShell execution). Ansible is 
an open-source IT automation engine that may help you save time at work while 
simultaneously improving the scalability, consistency, and dependability of your IT 
infrastructure.

It is designed for IT professionals who require it for app deployment, system 
integration, in-service coordination, and anything else that an IT admin or network 
manager routinely accomplishes. Sys admins and developers would be unable to keep 
up if they had to manage everything manually in today’s IT environments, which are 
usually too complex and often have to expand too quickly. 
Page2

Page3 
Automation makes complex activities easier to manage, allowing engineers to focus 
on tasks that offer value to the organization. This implies that time is saved and 
production is boosted. And as said earlier, Ansible is fast becoming extremely 
relevant among automation tools. While it is at the vanguard of automation, systems 
management, and DevOps, it is also a valuable everyday tool for developers. Ansible 
enables the rapid configuration of an entire network of devices without the

=== SOURCE: ansible using for devops Ansible is a powerful open-source automation tool… ===
ansible using for devops

Ansible is a powerful open-source automation tool widely used in DevOps for 
simplifying IT infrastructure automation. It enables developers and system 
administrators to automate tasks such as configuration management, application 
deployment, provisioning, and orchestration. Here's how Ansible integrates into 
DevOps workflows:

Key Features of Ansible in DevOps 
1. Agentless Architecture: 
o Ansible does not require an agent to be installed on managed nodes. It uses 
SSH for communication, making it lightweight and easy to set up. 
2. YAML-Based Playbooks: 
o Configurations are defined in YAML files called Playbooks. These are 
human-readable and easy to write, understand, and share. 
3. Idempotency: 
o Ensures that repeated executions of playbooks yield the same results, which 
is crucial for consistent deployments.

4. Extensibility: 
Ansible supports modules for different functionalities, from managing cloud 
resources (AWS, Azure, GCP) to configuring servers (Apache, Nginx, databases). 
5. Community Support: 
The Ansible Galaxy repository provides a wealth of pre-built roles and playbooks 
to speed up implementation. 
Use Cases of Ansible in DevOps 
1. Configuration Management: 
o Standardizing and maintaining system configurations across development, 
testing, and production environments. 
2. Continuous Deployment: 
o Automating the deployment of applications and services as part of a CI/CD 
pipeline. 
3. Provisioning Infrastructure: 
o Automating the setup of servers, VMs, and containers across cloud and on-
premise environments. 
4. Orchestration: 
o Managing complex multi-step workflows involving multiple systems and 
dependencies. 
5. Compliance Automation: 
o Ensuring systems adhere to security and compliance policies by automating 
regular checks. 
How Ansible Fits Into the DevOps Lifecycle 
1. Plan: 
o Define infrastructure requirements and configurations using playbooks. 
2. Develop: 
o Use Ansible to set up and configure development environments. 
3. Build: 
o Automate application builds using Ansible with CI/CD tools like Jenkins or GitLab 
CI. 
4. Release: 
o Deploy builds consistently across staging and production environments. 
5. Operate: 
o Automate operational tasks like patching, scaling, and backup management. 
6. Monitor: 
o Ensure systems are monitored and updated, integrating Ansible with monitoring 
tools.

Popular DevOps Tools Integrated with Ansible 
• Jenkins: Automate CI/CD workflows with Ansible for deployment and 
configuration. 
• Docker: Provision and manage containers. 
• Kubernetes: Deploy and manage Kubernetes clusters. 
• Terraform: Combine with Ansible for infrastructure provisioning and 
configuration management. 
• Git: Store playbooks and roles in version control for collaborative development. 
Advantages of Using Ansible in DevOps 
• Simple and easy to learn for beginners. 
• Agentless architecture reduces maintenance overhead. 
• Highly flexible and scalable for diverse env

=== SOURCE: iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94 T e r… ===
iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94
T e r r a f o r m

C o m m a n d s
iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94
Terraform is one of the most popular Infrastructure as
Code (IaC) tools that helps automate cloud
infrastructure deployment. But to use it effectively, you
need to know its essential commands.
1. Setting Up Terraform
2. Planning & Applying Changes
3. Destroying Infrastructure
4. Managing Terraform State
5. Working with Modules & Outputs
Terraform
iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94
Before diving into commands, let's look at a basic
Terraform configuration:
This code tells Terraform to create an AWS EC2 instance
using a specific AMI and instance type.

t e r r a f o r m i n i t
t e r r a f o r m i n i t
iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94
This command sets up a new or existing Terraform project. It
does the following:
Downloads necessary provider plugins (like AWS, Azure,
Google Cloud, etc.).
Configures the backend where Terraform stores its state
file.
Prepares Terraform to manage infrastructure.
 - Initialize a Terraform Project
terraform init
After running terraform init, Terraform will download the AWS
provider plugin needed to communicate with AWS.
touch main.tf # Create a new Terraform file
terraform init # Initialize Terraform in the directory

t e r r a f o r m i n i t
t e r r a f o r m i n i t
iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94
Terraform code should be clean and readable.
 This command automatically formats the
code properly.
 - Format Terraform Code
terraform fmt
Running terraform fmt will correct any indentation or spacing
issues in the configuration file.
terraform fmt # Reformats all Terraform files in the directory

t e r r a f o r m i n i t
t e r r a f o r m i n i t
iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94
Before applying changes, it's good practice to
validate your Terraform code. 
This command checks for syntax errors or
missing configurations.

- Check for Errors
terraform validate 
If there are syntax errors in the configuration, Terraform will
highlight them before applying changes.
terraform validate # Checks for syntax errors

t e r r a f o r m i n i t
t e r r a f o r m i n i t
iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94
Before making changes to your infrastructure,
you should preview what Terraform is about to
do. 
This command shows what will be added,
changed, or destroyed without applying
anything.

- Preview Changes
terraform plan
Terraform will output a plan detailing that it will create one EC2
instance.
terraform plan # Shows what Terraform will do

t e r r a f o r m i n i t
t e r r a f o r m i n i t
iamrishmish Rishabh Mishra Rishabh Mishra DevOps i_m_rishmish Rishmish94
Once you're happy with the plan, use this
command to actually create the infrastructure.
 - Apply Ch

=== SOURCE: youtube.com/techbeatly techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices Ansible Best… ===
youtube.com/techbeatly
techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices
Ansible Best Practices
youtube.com/techbeatly
Use only the features you needed in your playbook
Use simple methods to achieve your goal
Write playbooks as “Human Readable”
Use available modules rather than raw commands
Ansible is simple, make it simple
techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices
youtube.com/techbeatly
Playbooks, Configurations, Variables, Roles and Collections
Opportunity for Collaboration
Less worry about the old version of playbooks and configurations
Make Auditing possible
Create project-specific repositories 
techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices
Keep Projects in Version Control System
youtube.com/techbeatly
Use comments inside playbooks; useful for everyone
Keep a style guide
Use whitespaces and extra lines as needed
Practice names for tasks
Use proper tags for tasks
Main playbooks calling roles or sub-playbooks
Use explicit declarations (eg: state or overwrite actions)
Use handlers in playbooks and roles
Avoid shell and command modules as much as possible
techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices
Make Playbooks Reader Friendly
youtube.com/techbeatly
techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices
Keep a style guide
youtube.com/techbeatly
techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices
Native YAML for Playbooks
youtube.com/techbeatly
techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices
Avoid hardcoding 
youtube.com/techbeatly
VSCode
Atom
Sublime
Vim with Plugins
techbeatly.com/ansible-best-practices
Use editor with syntax highlighting